in the course of 1,461 such years, and. the festivals continually 
changed their season. Now the writer of Enoch recommends his © 
year of 364 days especially on the ground that the position of the 
years is not prematurely advanced or delayed by a single day, 7415. 
It was, therefore, nothing but his national prejudices, and possibly _ 
his stupidity, that prevented him, knowing as he did the Greek 
systems, from seeing that only a year of 3651 days could effect ‘ 
such a result. As for. Wieseler’s theory that the writer held to 
a year of 364 days with one intercalary day each year, and one 
every fourth year, there is no evidence for it in the text. The 
author’s reckoning of the year at 364 days may be partly due 
to his opposition to heathen systems, and partly to the fact that 
364 is divisible by seven, and amounts to fifty-two weeks exactly. 





Sect. ITI] Chapter DX XIT, 1-3 151 


The Sun. 


LXXII. 1. The Book of the courses of the luminaries of the 
heaven, the relations of each, according to their classes, their 


- dominion and their seasons, according to their names and places 


of origin, and according to their months, which Uriel, the holy 
angel, who was with me, who is their guide, showed me; and he 


_ showed me all their laws exactly as they are, and how it is with 
_ regard to all the years of the world and unto eternity, till the new 


_ western portals of the heaven. 


creation is accomplished which dureth till eternity. - 2. And this 
is the first law of the luminaries: the luminary the Sun has its 
rising in the eastern portals of the heaven, and its setting in the 
3. And I saw six portals in which 
the sun rises, and six portals in which the sun sets: and the moon 


rises and sets in these portals, and the leaders of the stars and 
| those whom they lead: six in the east and six in the west, 
and all following each other in accurately corresponding order : 
also many windows to the right and left of these portals. 


LXXIT. 1. As in the Parables, the 


| superseription of this book is far from 


accurately describing 


| 2 Peter 813 Rev. 211, 
_ xiii, 57-58 (S. B. Ε΄ xxiii. 194), similarly, 
‘it is stated that ‘the stars, the moon, 


contents. 
Dominion: cf. 75° 828-29 Names: 
ef. 781,, Places of origin. Prob- 
ably their places of rising. The new 
creation; cf. 454 9115, 16 Is, 6517 6622 
In the Yasts, 


its 


the sun and the endless lights . . . move 
round in their far-revolving circle for 
ever till they come to the time of the 
good restoration of the world’. All 
the laws of the heavenly bodies given in 
this book are valid till the new crea- 
tion. 2. This verse introduces an 
account of the sun in its progress 
through the signs of the zodiac and 
the increase and decrease of the 
days and nights thereby occasioned. 
Portals. The subject of the portals 


has already to some extent appeared 





in 33-36. But observe that, though 
portals of the winds and portals of the 
stars are there described, there is no. 
mention of portals of the sun and moon, 
According to 72-82, the sun, moon, 


-and stars pass through the same por- 


tals: can this hold true of 833-36, where 
the portals of the stars are said to be 
small and situated above the portals 
of the wind? Moreover, in 72° one 
of the sun’s portals is called ‘great’, 
3. Portals. These twelve portals go 
back ultimately to the twelve signs 
of the zodiac, According to the Baby- 
lonian view from which the specula- 
tions in the text are derived there 
were portals on both sides of the 
heaven in which the sun and moon 
rose and set. Creation Epos, v. 9. See 
Κ΄ A. T3 619, 630. In which (a, x). 
B-n ‘from which’, 
stars: see 75! (note). Windows: 
ef. ver, 7,757. Right and left, i.e. 


Leaders of the . 


152 The Book of Enoch [Sect, IIT 


4. And first there goes forth the great luminary, named the 
Sun, and his circumference is like the circumference of the 
heaven, and he is quite filled with illuminating and heating 
fire. 5. The chariot on which he ascends, the wind drives, 
and the sun goes down from the heaven and returns through the 
north in order to reach the east, and is so guided that he comes 
to the appropriate (lit. ‘that’) portal and shines in the face of the 
heaven. 6, In this way he rises in the first month in the great 
portal, which is the fourth | those six portals in the east]. 7. And 
in that fourth portal from which the sun rises in the first month 
are twelve window-openings, from which proceed a flame when 


they are opened in their season. ὅδ, When the sun rises in the 


heaven, he comes forth through that fourth portal thirty mornings 


south and north, according to the 
familiar Hebrew use. 4, Cf. 415-7, 
where the conception seems to be 
different. His circumference. .The 
sun is clearly circular; cf. 782 78°; 
also 184 784, It is doubtful whether 
he is conceived of as a sphere or merely 

a disk, I have translated on the 
latter supposition. 5. The sun, 
as also the other heavenly bodies, 
traverses the heaven in a chariot, 73? 
75% 8, driven by the wind, 184 73%, 
Through the north: cf. 415. Is 
guided. Possibly by an angel. In 
2 Enoch several angels precede the 
sun on his course. In 1-36 the 
heavenly bodies have a semi-con- 
scious existence; this is not so in 
72-82. 8. In the first month. 
The writer begins his description of 
the sun’s course with the first Hebrew 
month Abib (cf. Exod. 184), the time 
of the spring equinox. This month, 
called generally after the Captivity 
Nisan (cf. N eh, 21), was the first 
month of the ecclesiastical year, and 
corresponds to our April. The civil 
year began with Tishri, or October. 
The great portal. So called in contra- 


distinction from the ‘ window-open- 
ings’ in the next verse. Yet these 
portals are called ‘ small’ in 862, 7. 
Twelve window-openings. There 
are twelve such at every portal; cf. 72% 
757. The flame is the source of heat ; 
ef. 757, 8. The author’s system, 
whereby he seeks to replace the heathen 
conception of the sun’s revolution 
through the signs of the zodiac by a 
seheme founded as he believes on the 
O.T., is as follows. There are six 
portals in the east through which the 
sun rises in the course of the year, and | 
six in the west in which he sets. The 
first portal forms the most southern 
point of the sun’s journey, and the 
sixth portal the most northern. During 
the first six months, from the shortest. 
day to the longest, the sun advances: 
from the first portal to the sixth, and 
conversely, from the longest day to 
the shortest, he returns from the sixth 
portal to the first. In each portal the 
sun rises and sets one month in 
journey northwards, and likewise ri 
and sets for one month in each portal 
on his return journey, Thus arises 
the division of the year into twelve 















153 


in succession, and sets accurately in the fourth portal in the west 
of the heaven. 9. And during this period the day becomes 


Sect. IIT] Chapter LXXIT, 4-12 


daily longer and the night nightly shorter to the thirtieth 


morning. 10. On that day the day is longer than the night 
by a ninth part, and the day amounts exactly to ten parts and 
the night to eight parts. 11. And the sun rises from that 


fourth portal, and sets in the fourth and returns to the fifth 


_ portal of the east thirty mornings, and rises from it and sets in the 


- fifth portal. 


months, Moreover, during each month 


on his journey northwards, the day 


daily grows longer and the night daily 
shorter, and this is owing to a daily 


| change of position on the part of the 
| sun within each gate. Of these different 


1 


| positions or stations of the sun there 


are 364. In this way the author seeks 


_ to dispense With the signs of the zodiac, 


| The sun’s northward journey from the 
first to the sixth portal corresponds 


with his course through the signs 


-Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, 
‘Taurus, and Gemini; and the sun’s 
return journey from the sixth to the 
_ first portal corresponds with his course 


Scorpio, 


through Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, 
and Sagittarius. Though 
perfectly acquainted with a year of 


3654 days, as we shall see later, the 


author reckoned it as consisting of 
864 days, partly possibly on anti- 
‘heathen grounds, and partly for the 
attractive reason that the sum total is 


divisible by seven, and thus represents 
52 sabbaths of days. The author’s 
solar year of 364 days is made up of 
eight months of 30 days each, and 
four months of 31 days each—these 
latter corresponding with the spring 
‘and autumn equinoxes and the summer 


and winter solstices, or, according to 


the system of our author, with the sun’s 


position in the first, third, fourth, and 
‘sixth portals. These four months have 
each 31 days ‘on account of the sign’, 


12, And then the day becomes longer by ttwof 


1,6. that of the equinoxes or the sol- 
stices; οἵ, 7218, 19, The author’s division 
of the day into eighteen parts is possibly 
his own device, yet it may rest on 
traditions derived from northern Asia 
of the latitude of 49°, as Krieger sup- 
poses, when the longest day is twice 
as long as the shortest night, as our 
author. states it, 10. On that 
day (a-t). ¢,8 ‘and on that day’. 
By a ninth part. The MSS. read: 
‘the day is longer by twice as much than 
the night’; for ka‘ébata means here 
‘twice as much’ as in 7214. 3 Hence 
it is an interpolation. This interpola- 
tion further led to the extrusion of 
tas‘tta “éda = ‘the ninth part’ from 
the clause in mé¢,8. But this last 
phrase is found in gqu, and gives the 
sense required by the context. The 
ninth part = the ninth part of the whole 
day. During six months the day 
grows longer and the night shorter 
each month by ;4,th. Hence the entire 
difference each month amounts to - 5 
or 3th of aday. Flemming transposes 
the phrase before ‘tlat, making it 
dependent on ka‘ébata, and renders it 
‘um das Doppelte eines Neuntels’; but 
this rendering, which Martin follows, 
is doubtful grammatically, and even 
if it were right in grammar it would 
be wrongin sense. Exactly (a). &gt;8. 
11. In the fourth. + ‘ portal’ q, β-- 
bedz τα. 12. And!° &gt;bedlopxy τα κ᾿. 
+Twot+. We should read ‘one’, 


154 The Book of Enoch (Sect. ΤΠ 


parts and amounts to eleven parts, and the night becomes shorter 
and amounts to seven parts. 13. And it returns to the east 
and enters into the sixth portal, and rises and sets in the sixth 
portal one and thirty mornings on account of its sign. 14, On 
that day the day becomes longer than the night, and the day 
becomes double the night, and the day becomes twelve parts, 
and the night is shortened and becomes six parts. 15. And 
the sun mounts up to make the day shorter and the night longer, 
and the sun returns to the east and enters into the sixth portal, 
and rises from it and sets thirty mornings. 16. And when 
thirty mornings are accomplished, the day decreases by exactly | 
one part, and becomes eleven parts, and the night seven. 17. And 

the sun goes forth from that sixth portal in the west, and goes 

to the east and rises in the fifth portal for thirty mornings, and 
sets in the west again in the fifth western portal. 18. On that 
day the day decreases by {ὑπο parts, and amounts to ten parts 
and the night to eight parts. 19, And the sun goes forth 
from that fifth portal and sets in the fifth portal of the west, | 
and rises in the fourth portal for one and thirty mornings on 
account of its sign, and sets in the west. 20. On that day the 
day is equalised with the night, [and becomes of equal length], 
and the night amounts to nine parts and the day to nine parts. 
21. And the sun rises from that portal and sets in the west, and 














returns to the east and rises thirty mornings in the third portal 
and sets in the west in the third portal. 22, And on that day 
the night becomes longer than the day, and night becomes longer 
than night, and day shorter than day till the thirtieth morning, 
and the night amounts exactly to ten parts and the day to eight 
parts. 23. And the sun rises from that third portal and sets” 


13. It returns (a). 68 ‘the sun ‘one’. The same error occurred in 
returns ’. Portal! °, &gt; a-t. On _ ver. 12. 19. Its sign. + ‘in the 
account of its sign, i.e. that of fourth portal in the east’, a-w. +‘ 
the summer solstice; cf. 7219 755 787. theeast’,u. 20. Clause bracketed 
14, On that day (a-q). 458 ‘and on as a duplicate rendering. 22. An 
that day’. 15. Mounts up to -night becomes longer than nigh 
start on his return journey to the first (a-m), β ‘till the thirtieth morning” 
portal. 18. For ‘ttwot’ read Morning (a-q, efln).&gt;q. abcdhikos 


‘Sect. ITT] Chapter LXXIT, 13-338 155 


in the third portal in the west and returns to the east, and for 
thirty mornings rises in the second portal in the east, and in like 
‘manner sets in the second portal in the west of the heaven. 
(24. And on that day the night amounts to eleven parts and the 
‘day to seven parts. 25. And the sun rises on that day from 
‘that second portal and sets in the west in the second portal, and 
(returns to the east into the first portal for one and thirty 
‘mornings, and sets in the first portal in the west of the heaven. 
(26. And on that day the night becomes longer and amounts to 
the double of the day: and the night amounts exactly to twelve 
parts and the day to six. 27. And the sun has (therewith) 
traversed the divisions of his orbit and turns again on those 
divisions of his orbit, and enters that portal thirty mornings and 
‘sets also in the west opposite to it. 28. And on that night has 
‘the night decreased in length by a } ninth} part, and the night 
has become eleven parts and the day seven parts. 29. And 
Ἵ e sun has returned and entered into the second portal in the 
“east, and returns on those his divisions of his orbit for thirty 
‘mornings, rising. and setting. 80. And on that day the night 
‘decreases in length, and the night amounts to ten parts and the 
day to eight. 81. And on that day the sun rises from that 
portal, and sets in the west, and returns to the east, and rises in 
the third portal for one and thirty mornings, and sets in the west 
of the heaven. 32. On that day the night decreases and 
amounts to nine parts, and the day to nine parts, and the night 
is equal to the day and the year is exactly as to its days three 
hundred and sixty-four. 88. And the length of the day and 
of the night, and the shortness of the day and of the night arise 
---through the course of the sun these distinctions are made (lit. 





τὰ yb ‘day’. 25. In the first portal original, must be of half the sun; for 
(B-a). gq ‘in it on the first day(?)’, night and day cannot decrease or 
m ‘in the sixth portal’, fu ‘on that increase by more than 4th, as in 


day’. 27. That portal (m,8). ver. 16. Perhaps we might emend 
a-m ‘all the portals’. 28. On ’émntha into ’&amp;m a‘Alt, and translate 
that night (9q,f). τι, β- ‘on that ‘has the night grown shorter than the 
day’. A‘+tninth*} part (gqu).&gt;m. day by a ninth part’. 31, That 


i, B-a ‘one part’, The ‘ninth’, if portal(a-t). ἐ, 8 ‘that second portal’. 


156 The Book of Enoch [Sect. III 


‘they are separated’). 34, So it comes that its course becomes 
daily longer, and its course nightly shorter. 35, And this is 
the law and the course of the sun, and his return as often as he 
returns sixty times and rises, i.e. the great luminary which is 
named the Sun, for ever and ever. 86. And that which (thus) 
rises is the great luminary, and is so named according to its 
appearance, according as the Lord commanded. 37. As he 
rises, so he sets and decreases not, and rests not, but runs day 
and night, and his light is sevenfold brighter than that of the 
moon ; but as regards size they are both equal. 


The Moon and its Phases. 
4 


LXXIII. 1. And after this law I saw another law dealing 
2. And 
her circumference is like the cireumference of the heaven, and 
her chariot in which she rides is driven by the wind, and light is 
given to her in (definite) measure. 3. And her rising and 
setting changes every month: and her days are like the days of 
the sun, and when her light is uniform (i.e. full) it amounts 
to the seventh part of the light of the sun. 4. And thus she 
rises. And her first phase in the east comes forth on the thirtieth 












with the smaller luminary, which is named the Moon. 


35. As often as he returns sixty 
times (a-m). m,B8 ‘as often as he 
returns, he returns sixty times’, Sixty 
times. The sun is one month in each 


size as—possibly a little greater or less 
than—they appear to us. This view 
he derived from his master Epicurus, 
as may be seen from comparing a letter 


portal on his northward journey, and 
one month in each portal on his south- 
ward: therefore two months in each 
portal. The author disregards for the 
time being the extra day in the first, 


third, fourth, and sixth portals. The 
great luminary (a). 8B ‘the great 
eternal luminary’. 87. As he 


rises, so he sets (9). mgt ‘so he rises 
and (+ ‘so’ qt) he sets’, w ‘and so he 
sets’, B—anx ‘and so he rises and sets’. 
Day and night. + ‘in his chariot’ 
#2, 8B. Sevenfold brighter. Cf. 784 
732, As regards size... equal. 
According to Lucretius 55°45! the sun, 
moon, and the stars are about the same 


of the latter to Pythocles in Diog. Lael 
x. 84-94, But it is not necessary to 
suppose any dependence on the part 
of our text, which gives probably the 
ordinary accepted view. : 
LXXIII. This and the followin, 
chapter treat of the course of the moon, 
2. The heaven Sette bedilo). m, 
aefhknpw ‘the sun’. 3. Her 
rising and setting, i.e. the otal of | 
her rising and setting. Seventh 
part of the light of the sun: cf. 72 
784, 4. Her first phase, lit. ‘he 
beginning’. The moon on the first 
day of her reappearance is here the 
new moon in the popular sense, not #] 










| 
Sect. TIT] 


Chapters LXXII. 834—LX XIII. 5 


157 


‘morning : and on that day she becomes visible, and constitutes 
for you the first phase of the moon on the thirtieth day together 


with the sun in the portal where the sun rises. 


5. And the 


one half of her goes forth by a seventh part, and her whole 
= is empty, without light, with the exception of 
“ὦ part of it, (and) the fourteenth part of her light. 


new moon strictly so called, which is 
invisible. Thirtieth morning, i.e. of 
| ἴωσι month. Together with 
the sun. The sun and moon are still 
‘in the same portal on the first day after 
i peyanction, as each portal embraces 
am extent of 30 degrees, and the 
moon advances only 18 degrees daily. 
| 5-8. The author’s account of the phases 
of the moon is very hard to follow. 
‘His scheme seems to be as follows. 
‘The lunar month amounts to 30 days 
and 29 days alternately. It is divided 
into two parts: during the first part 
‘the moon waxes from new moon to 
‘full moon i in 14 days when the month 
is 29 days, and in 15 when the month 
is 80 days. During the second part 
the moon wanes from full moon till 
she disappears, always, it would seem, 
in 15 days. Again, the author divides 
the moon into 14 parts, and explains 
the waxing of the moon by the succes- 
‘sive lighting up of each one of the 
14 parts by the sun, and the waning 
by the successive withdrawal of light 
from the 14 parts till it all disappears, 
But to proceed more exactly, where 
there are 15 days from new moon to 
full moon, the author supposes an 
additional 28th part; this part only 
is lighted up on the first day of such 
a month, whereas ;},th part is lighted 
up each day of the remaining 14 days, 
till the moon becomes full. The waning, 
which apparently always takes 15 days, 
is the reverse of this process. Again, 
where there are 14 days from new 
moon to full moon, the moon has at 
the end of the first day j,th part + 


gath part, i.e. 3ths, and takes an 
additional 14th part of light each of 
the remaining 18 days. According to 
the text above followed, vv. 5, 6 
suppose the period from new to full 
moon to be 14 days, whereas ver. 7 
supposes this period to be 15 days. 
5. In this verse and the next the 
fractions are fractions of half the 
moon. ‘Thus, 4th of it, i.e. of the 
half moon = «τὺ of whole moon, and 
ταῦ of half moon = Ath of whole 
moon: thus, ths of whole moon are 
lighted on the first day of new moon, 
when there are but 14 days to the full 
moon. Goes forth. The MSS. read 
rehiq = ἐξέχων, which is used of the 
rising or appearing of the sun. ἐξέχων 
might in turn be a rendering of xs 
which is used of the rising of the sun 
and stars. Flemming obelizes the word 


and proposes γ᾽ ἃ] = ‘visible’, One- 
séventh part (gqtu, abefikla 4}). 
rest of the MSS. are corrupt. (And) 


the fourteenth part (gqu). mt, B ‘ of 
the fourteenth part’. Possibly the ‘em 
(=‘of’) is a corruption of the wa 
(=‘and’) which I have supplied. g 
adds ‘ of half’, but unnecessarily, since 
the fractions are fractions of the half 
of the moon. 6. Observe when 
the period from new moon to full moon 
is 14 days that it is not said that the 
moon receives ;th part and 3th, but 
only the former; it seems, tastetoe. 
that the moon is supposed to have this 
gsth to begin with. It is different in 
the case of the 15-days’ period. On 
the first day of such a period the moon 
receives 2th part of light. In this 


158 


The Book of Enoch [Sect. m1 


6. And when she receives one-seventh part of the half of her 
light, her light amounts to one-seventh part and the half thereof. 
7. And she sets with the sun, and when the sun rises the moon 
_rises with him and receives the half of one part of light, and in” 
that night in the beginning of her morning [in the commence- 
ment of the lunar day] the moon sets with the sun, and is 
invisible that night with the fourteen parts and the half of one 






of them. 


thirteen parts. 


The Lunar Year, 


LXXIV. 1, And I saw another course, a law for her, (and) 
πὰ according to that law she performs her monthly revolution, 

. And all these Uriel, the holy angel who is the leader of them 
all, showed to me, and their positions, and I wrote down theit 
positions as he showed them to me, and I wrote down thei 
months as they were, and the appearance of their lights till 
fifteen days were accomplished. 


verse there are 14 days to full moon. 
One-seventh part 2° (gmqu,d). t,l 
‘the thirteenth part’, @-dklo ‘the 
fourteenth part’, According to ¢ and 
the inferior MSS. the parts are fractions 
of the half moon in the first half of the 
sentence, and fractions of the whole 
moon in the second half, Yet Flemming 
and Martin follow the inferior MSS, 
herein, 7. Half of one part of 
light, i.e. A;th. See previous notes, 
and observe that in this verse the frac- 
tions are fractions of the whole moon. 
Fourteen parts (gu, abcdefhknox ya). 
mgt, il,b ‘ thirteen parts’, 7,8 
These verses suppose the case when 
there are 15 days from new to full 
moon. On the first day the moon 
receives oath part of light, and has 
advanced to some slight degree out 


8. And she rises on that day with exactly a seventh 
part, and comes forth and recedes from the rising of the sun, and 
in her remaining days she becomes bright in the (remaining) 



























. 


3. In single seventh 


of conjunction, but still practically set 
with the sun, and may be said to be 
invisible. On the second day sh 
receives ;4,th part of light, and 
comes visible to that extent, Thus 
the jth part is ignored as bei 
practically invisible. During the 
maining 13 days the moon receives dail 
ath part of light, 8. Thirtee 
parts (a,7). mn ‘fourteen parts’, 
LXXIV, In this chapter the writer 
deals shortly with the waxing and war 
ing of the moon, her monthly change 
position with regard to the signs ai 
the sun, and the difference betwee 
lunar and solar years. 2. | 
them all, i.e. the various phases” 
the moon. Fifteen days, i.e. fro! 
a conjunction till full moon or fr 
full moon till a conjunction. 


“Sect. ΠῚ Chapters LXXIII. 6—LXXIV. 10 159 


she accomplishes all her light in the east, and in single seventh 

parts accomplishes all her darkness in the west, 4, And in 

certain months she alters her settings, and in certain months she 
| pursues her own peculiar course, 5. In two months the moon sets 

with the sun in those two middle portals the third and the fourth. 
6. She goes forth for seven days, and turns about and returns 
again through the portal where the sun rises, and accomplishes 
all her light: and she recedes from the sun, and in eight days 
᾿ enters the sixth portal from which the sun goes forth, 7, And 
| when the sun goes forth from the fourth portal she goes forth 
seven days, until she goes forth from the fifth and turns back 
| again in seven days into the fourth portal and accomplishes all 
| her light: and she recedes and enters into the first portal in eight 
‘days. 8. And she returns again in seven days into the fourth 
; portal from which the sun goes forth. 9. Thus I saw their 

- position —how the moons rose and the sun set in those days. 
: 10. And if five years are added together the sun has an overplus 
οὗ thirty days, and all the days which accrue to it for one of 
those five years, when they are full, amount to 364 days. 


Ck 73 and 78. 
: seventh eee 
‘Ber own peculiar course, i.e. a 








And in single 
darkness. &gt;a, an. 4, 


course independent of that of the sun, 


5, 6. During two months the moon 
sets with the sun as new moon and as 
full moon. When the sun is in Aries 
and Libra, the new moon and the full 


moon are in the third and fourth 
portals, In verse 6 the moon goes forth 
as it waxes from the third portal 
through the signs to the first portal in 
seven days, turns about, and returns to 
the portal where the sun rises, i.e. the 


third, in seven or eight days, and there 


becomes full moon, and proceeds thence 
through the fourth and fifth to the 
sixth portal, where she arrives after 
eight days. Thence the moon returns 
to the third portal in seven days, 
6. And accomplishes. ¢?, β ‘and in 
that accomplishes’, 7, 8. The 


scheme with regard to the fourth portal 
and the new moon. The moon proceeds 
to the sixth portal and returns to the 
fourth in 14 days, and thence to 
the first portal and back in 15 days. 
9, How the moons rose and the 
sun set (a-q). ῳ, β ‘according to the 
order of their moons the sun rising and 
setting ’. 10, 11, The difference 
between the lunar and the solar year. 
According to 781 16, in a lurar year 
there are six months of 30 days, and six 
months of 29 days each—in all 354 days, 
In a solar year there are twelve months 
of 30 days each and four intercalary 
days in the equinoxes and solstices—in 
all 364 days (cf, 742° 12 75%). Thus the 
difference between the lunar and the 
solar year amounts to 10 days. But in 
ver. 105 and 11 no account is taken of 
the intercalary days in the solar year, 
so that the solar year is reckoned at 


160 


The Book of Enoch 


[Sect. III 


11. And the overplus of the sun and of the stars amounts to 
six days: in 5 years 6 days every year come to 30 days: and the 
moon falls behind the sun and stars to the number of 80 days. 
12. And the sun and the stars bring in all the years exactly, so that 
they do not advance or delay their position by a single day unto 
eternity ; but complete the years with perfect justice in 364 


days. 


1820 days, so that in 8 years there are 2912 days. 


13. In 3 years there are 1092 days, and in 5 years 


14. For 


the moon alone the days amount in 8 years to 1062 days, and in 
5 years she falls 50 days behind: [i. 6. to the sum (of 1770) there 


is to be added (1000 and) 62 days]. 


360 days. Thus the difference in this 
case is six days. 11. The moon 
(3, 8). ahas preserved the word but in 
the wrong context; for it has transposed 
it into the next sentence and made it 
the subject of ‘ bring in’. 12, And 
the sun. So gmt save that they place 
‘from’ before ‘the sun’. &gt; qu, B. 
Andthe stars (w). gmt‘ and from the 
&gt; #2, 8. Here all MSS. add 
‘and (&gt;) the moon’, But ‘the moon’ 
belonged to ver. 11, see note. This 
wrong transposition was made by a. 
B followed a herein, and at the same 
time preserved the word in its original 
setting. Our author advocates a solar 
and sidereal year as the author of 
Jubilees 652-86, For ‘and the sun and 
the stars’ 72,8 read ‘and the moon’, 
thus representing the moon as the per- 
fect time divider in glaring contradic- 
tion with verses 10-11 and Jub. 6%. 
But complete = ἀλλὰ τελοῦσιν, which 
was corrupted into ἀλλὰ ἀλλάττουσιν. 
Whence the Ethiopic text. 13-16. 
We have here clearly a reference to the 
eight-year cycle or octaeteris. In this 
cycle an intercalary month of 30 days 
was inserted in the third, fifth, and 
eighth years of the cycle in order to 
reconcile the lunar and solar years, 
which were reckoned respectively at 


stars ’. 


15. And in 5 years there 


354 and 3653 days. As our author, 
however, does not reckon the solar 
year at 365} days, but at 364, he pro- 
ceeds to reconcile this solar year of 
364 days with the lunar year of 354, 
Thus (ver. 13) in three such solar years 
there are 1092 days; in five, 1820 
days; in eight, 2912 days; whereas 


' (ver. 14, 15) in three lunar years there 


are 1062 days; in five, 1770 days; in 
eight, 2832 days. Thus there is a 
difference of 80 days between eight 
solar years of 364 days and eight lunar 
years. As all these calculations 
merely amount to saying that his 
solar year has 10 days more than the | 
lunar, the writer had obviously the 
eight-year cycle before him; for only 
thus can we explain the external re- 
semblance of his system to the Greek 
cycle; cf. Special Introd. p. 150. 
Unless the author had the Greek eight- 
year cycle before him and wished 
give his own work some semblance of 
likeness thereto, there was no need 

go through all these periods of three, 
five, and eight years; for they do 

in fact contribute a single additio: 
fact, but merely say over and ov 
again that the difference between 36 
and 354 days is 10 days. 14. [i. 

to the sum (of 1770) there is 





Sect. 1Π] 


Chapters LXXIV. 11—LXXV. ἃ 161 


are 1770 days, so that for the moon the days in 8 years amount 
to 2832 days. 16, [For in 8 years she falls behind to the 
amount of 80 days], all the days she falls behind in 8 years are 80, 
17. And the year is accurately completed in conformity with their 
world-stations and the stations of the sun, which rise from the 
portals through which it (the sun) rises and sets 30 days. 
LXXY, 1. And the leaders of the heads of the thousands, 


_ who are placed over the whole creation and over all the stars, 
have also to do with the four intercalary days, being inseparable 
from their office, according to the reckoning of the year, and 
these render service on the four days which are not reckoned in 


‘the reckoning of the year. 


5 


wrong therein, for those luminaries truly render service on the 


2. And owing to them men go 


; world-stations, one in the first portal, one in the third portal of 
_ the heaven, one in the fourth portal, and one in the sixth portal, 


and the exactness of the year is accomplished through its separate 


be added (1000 and) 62 days.] 


This clause is bracketed as a marginal 
gloss as Beer and Flemming have re- 
eognized. If it belonged to the text at 


all, it should be found at the close of 


_ ver. 15 ; for it simply states that 2832 


(= the days in 8 lunar years) arises 
from the addition of 1770 (= the days 
in 5 lunar years) and 1062 (= the days 


in 8 lunar years). The words (‘1000 


and’) are found only in the margin 
of ¢. 16, The bracketed clause 
and that which follows are duplicate 
renderings. 17. Their world- 
stations (a-m). τι, B ‘their stations’, 
Are these the world-stations referred 
to in 75? in connexion with the inter- 
calary days, which are presided over 
by the four angels who are heads of 
thousands? In ver. 12 the stars are 
mentioned in connexion with the sun. 
In my first edition I explained it as 
follows: ‘which (i.e, the sun and 
moon) rise from the portals through 
which it (i.e. the sun) rises and sets 
1870 


thirty days’, But this is very un- 
satisfactory. 

LXXV. This chapter deals with 
the intercalary days, the stars, and the 
sun, 1, The four intercalary days are 
under the charge of the highest stars, 
the leaders of the heads of ten thou- 
sands. These are not the chiliarchs, as 
Dillmann supposes (p. 248), but the 
leaders of the chiliarchs, For further 
development of this subject see 8213, 12, 
These leaders are not angels, as might 
be supjosed, but simply ‘luminaries’ ; 
cf, ver. 2. Andl? (q,8). &gt; α-ῃ. 
Their office (m). a-m ‘its (&gt; 4) 
office’, ἐξ, 8 ‘their position ’, The 
reckoning 19 (a), β ‘all the reckon- 
ing’, Are not reckoned in the 
reckoning of the year. Apparently 
the year was popularly reckoned at 360 
days; cf. 825. 2. Men do not 
know of these intercalary days, and so 
reckon wrongly; cf. 824° The 
exactness of the year (4). g ‘in 
exactness the world’, mtu, B ‘the 


162 The Book of Enoch 


three hundred and sixty-four stations. 3. For the signs and 
the times and the years and the days the angel Uriel showed to 
me, whom the Lord of glory hath set for ever over all the 
luminaries of the heaven, in the heaven and in the world, that 
they should rule on the face of the heaven and be seen on the 
earth, and be leaders for the day and the night, i.e. the sun, 
moon, and stars, and all the ministering creatures which make 
their revolution in all the chariots of the heaven, 4. In like 
manner twelve doors Uriel showed me, open in the circumference 
of the sun’s chariot in the heaven, through which the rays of the 
sun break forth: and from them is warmth diffused over the 
earth, when they are opened at their appointed seasons. 5, [And 
for the winds and the spirit of the dew} when they are opened, 
standing open in the heavens at the ends.] 6, As for the 
twelve portals in the heaven, at the ends of the earth, out of 
which go forth the sun, moon, and stars, and all the works 
of heaven in the east and in the west, 7. There are many 
windows open to the left and right of them, and one window at 


[Sect. III 


exactness of the world’. In the 
Ethiopic ‘am = ‘year’ and ‘Alam 
=‘world’. Is accomplished (qm, B). 
qtu ‘accomplishes’, i.e. ‘the exact- 
ness’, &amp;c, 8. Yet these inter- 
calary days are a reality; for Uriel 
showed them to Enoch; cf. 721. 
Signs, i.e. of the zodiac; cf. 72% 1%. 
Lord of glory (a-q). q ‘Lord of 
Spirits’, β-ἰ ‘eternal Lord of glory’: 
see 842 (note). Chariots of the 
heaven: cf. 725. q reads ‘ troops of 
the heaven’, 4. The variation in 
the amount of heat given by the sun is 
explained by twelve openings in the 
disk of the sun through which heat 
is given forth in proportion to the num- 
ber of windows opened. Doors Uriel 
showed me, open ((m)tu, afhikn). 
g ‘open’. q ‘doors and Uriel showed 
me’. 5. The first clause of this 
verse is unintelligible, and the rest of 


it looks like a dittograph of the last 


clause in ver. 4, and the first in ver. 6. 
The second clause follows a—w: ἐξ, Bread 
‘when they are opened in the seasons, 
standing open’, ὅθ. The entire verse 
is, with Dillmann, Beer, Martin, to be 
rejected as an intrusion, 6, 7. 
Adjoining each one of these twelve 
portals of the sun are twelve windows 
open to the left and right of them; ef. 
72%, 7, These diffuse warmth over the 
earth, one being open at a time, and 
all differing in degree of heatin 7 
power. 6. This verse begins in a 
with a dittograph from ver. 4, ‘ when 
they are opened’. Cf, ver. 5. β has 
no such dittograph, but tries to giv } 
a πόλος to the verse by inserting 
‘I saw’, and changing the words 
‘ twelve portals’, which are a nomina- 
tivus pendens, into the acc, But 
is manifestly wrong. These port 
have been under discussion continual, 
throughout the last three chap ori 











J 


Sect. 11] Chapters LXXV. 8—LXXVI. 4 168 


its (appointed) season produces warmth, corresponding (as these 
do) to those doors from which the stars come forth according as 
He has commanded them, and wherein they set corresponding to 
their number. 8. And I saw chariots in the heaven, running 
in the world, above those portals in which revolve the stars that 
never set. 9. And one is larger than all the rest, and it is 
that that makes its course through‘the entire world. 


The Twelve Winds and their Portals. 


LXXVI. 1. And at the ends of the earth I saw twelve portals 
open to all the quarters (of the heaven), from which the winds 
go forth and blow over the earth. 2. Three of them are open 
on the face (1. 6. the east) of the heavens, and three in the west, 
and three on the right (i.e. the south) of the heaven, and three 
on the left (i.e. the north). 3. And the three first are those of 
the east, and three are of tthe north, and three [after those on 


_ the left] of the south}, and three of ‘the west. 


4. Through 


_ four of these come winds of blessing and prosperity, and from 


To say that Enoch saw them now 


would be immeasurably inept. 8. 
Above. + ‘and below’ bedflopway 
τα 4b. 9. One is larger. This 


may be the Great Bear. 


ee Fe 


LXXVI. This chapter gives a de- 
tailed account of the twelve portals of 
the winds and the nature of the winds 
which issue therefrom. The short 
account in 33-36 agrees with it. This 
disquisition on the nature of the winds 
has as much relation to reality as that 
on the year of 364 days. 1, The 
quarters. The text has here ‘ wind’, 
which is a rendering of ΠῚ = ‘ quarter 
of the heaven’. See note on 71. 
2. This method of designating the four 
quarters of the earth was usual among 
the Hebrews ; cf. 72°. 3. And!°, 
&gt; gmt. The order of the winds in 
this verse is undoubtedly wrong. First 





of all the clause which I have 
bracketed is nonsense in any case. 


It was added after the transposition. 
Martin suggests that the words trans- 
lated ‘north’ and ‘south’, i.e. mas‘t 
and ’azéb, should be rendered ‘ south’ 
and ‘north’, since these words at 


‘one period were confused together, 


This is quite true, but it can hardly be 
the case in the Ethiopic version of 
Enoch, which carefully renders βορρᾶς 
by mas‘é in 28% 321, cf. 708, &amp;c., 
&amp;e., and νότος by ’azéb in 18% 7, 
Hence we have simply to transpose the 
text here in order to recover the 
original order, i.e. ‘And the three 
first are those of the east, and three 
are of the south, and three of the 
north, and three of the west’. This is 
the order in which the winds are dealt 
with in the verses that follow. ἡ 4, 
Through four of these portals come 
beneficial winds, i.e, the middle wind 
of the three in each quarter: the rest 
are hurtful. The winds from the four 


M2 


164 The Book of Enoch Σ᾿ [Sect. TIT 


those eight come hurtful winds: when they are sent, they bring 
destruction on all the earth and on the water upon it, and on all 
who dwell thereon, and on everything which is in the water and 
on the land._ 

5, And the first. wind from those portals, called the east wind, 
comes forth through the first portal which is in the east, in- 
clining towards the south; from it come forth desolation, 
drought, heat, and destruction. 6. And through the second 
portal in the middle comes what is fitting, and from it there 
come rain and fruitfulness and prosperity and dew; and through 
the third portal which lies toward the north come cold and drought, 

7. And after these come forth the south winds through three 
portals; through the first portal of them inclining to the east 
comes forth a hot wind. 8. And through the middle portal 
next to it there come forth fragrant smells, and dew and rain, 
and prosperity and health, 9. And through the third portal 
lying to the west come forth dew and rain, locusts and 
desolation. | | 

10. And after these the north winds; from the seventh portal 
in the east come dew and rain, locusts and desolation. 11. And 
from the middle portal come in a direct direction health and 
rain and dew and prosperity ; and through the third portal in © 
the west come cloud and hoar-frost, and snow and rain, and dew ; 
and locusts. pean 
corners are destructive as in Rev, 71°. «618 first through the first’, The latter 
According to our author’s scheme there form is not found in the description of © 











are two destructive winds at each any of the winds. 8. The S, wind. ; 
corner of the earth. 5-6. Winds 9, TheSWS, wind, 10, The NEN, 
from the east, i.e, the ESE. wind, the wind. North winds, MSS, add a gloss: 
E, and ENE. winds, 6. Whatis ‘whichis named the sea and which came 





fitting or ‘advantageous’ or ‘right’, forth’, In theeast, gtuadd ‘towards 
So I render rét‘é. The same idea the south’, m, β--Ο χω ‘which inclines to- 
recurs in ver, 11, where the word is wards the south’, q ‘south’, 11. The 
rét‘ét, but is rendered ‘in a direct N.and NWN.winds. Come ina di- 
direction’, Perhaps we should read rectdirection. Perhapsweshould read 
τοῦ in the latter verse also, and ‘comes what is fitting’, See note on 
render as above. 7-9. Windsfrom ver.6. Health and rain and dew 
the south. 7. The SES. wind. (a), B‘rain and dewand health’, In 
Through the first (qv). gmt,8.read the west. MSS, add ‘ which inclines’ 


Chapters LXXVI. 5—LXXVIL. 8 165 


12. And after these [four] are the west winds : through the 
first portal adjoining the north come forth dew and hoar-frost, 
and cold and snow and frost. 13. And from the middle 
portal come forth dew and rain, and prosperity and blessing ; 
and through the last portal which adjoins the south come forth 
drought and desolation, and burning and destruction. 14. And 
the twelve portals of the four quarters of the heaven are there- 
with completed, and all their laws and all their plagues and all 
their benefactions have I shown to thee, my son Methuselah. 


Sect. IIT] 


Lhe Four Quarters of the World: the Seven Mountains, the Seven 
Rivers, Se. 

LXXVII. 1. And the first quarter is called the east, because 
it is the first: and the second, the south, because the Most High 
will descend there, yea, there in quite a special sense will He 
who is blessed for ever descend. 2. And the west quarter 
is named the diminished, because there all the luminaries of the 
heaven wane and go down. 8. And the fourth quarter, 
named the north, is divided into three parts: the first of them 
is for the dwelling of men: and the second contains seas of 
water, and the abysses and forests and rivers, and darkness and 
clouds; and the third part contains the garden of righteousness. 


to the north’—an absurd addition. ~the Greek translator rendered by ὕστε- 


12. The WNW. wind. Dew. + ρῶν. So Dillmann. The north, fiDY, 
‘and rain’ B. 13. The W. and is divided into three’ parts: one for 
_WSW. winds. 14. Quarters. men, the second for waters; cf. MDY¥ 


MSS. read ‘ portals’, i.e. θυρῶν cor- 
rupt for μερῶν, a rendering of MN. 
All 2°, &gt; qu. All 8°, &gt; q, B-fhi. 
My son Methuselah : cf. 821. 
LXXVII. 1-3. These verses deal 


= ‘an overflowing’: for darkness and 
cloud, from }D¥, ‘to render invisible’. 
The third encloses Paradise, from j&gt;S, 
‘to reserve’. Paradise is the recom- 
pense reserved for the righteous, Ps. 


not with the ten winds but with the 
four quarters. The first quarter is the 
east, i.e. DT, because it is in front or 
the first, DD. The second the south, 
DING, « i iadatioe the Most High descends 
there’ from DI ΤῸ; cf. 25%. The west 
is called the waning quarter, for which 
probably there stood in the Hebrew 
finns (not existing in Aramaic), which 


311°; cf. Halévy, Journal Asiat. 1867. 
1. The first quarter. Here and in 
verses 2, 3 the text = ‘wind’, which 
is a rendering of ΠῚ, which in this 
context, as in Ezek, 422°, should have 
been rendered μέρος = ‘ quarter’. 3. 
The garden of righteousness: see 60% 
(note) 70% (note). 4. The number 
seven plays a great réle in this book, 


166 The Book of Enoch 


4. I saw seven high mountains, higher than all the mountains 
which arevon the earth: and thence comes forth hoar-frost, and 
days, seasons, and years pass away. 5. I saw seven rivers on 
the earth larger than all the rivers: one of them coming from 
the +west} pours its waters into the Great Sea. 6. And 
these two come from the north to the sea and pour their waters 
into the Erythraean Sea in the east. 7. And the remaining 
four come forth on the side of the north to their own sea, (two 
of them to) the Erythraean Sea, and two into the Great Sea and 
discharge themselves there [and some say: into the desert]. 
8. Seven great islands I saw in the sea and in the mainland: 
two in the mainland and five in the Great Sea. 


{Sect. III 


The Sun and Moon: the Waxing and Waning of the Moon. 


LXXVIII. 1. And the names of the sun are the following: 
the first Orjirés, and the second Témias, 2. And the moon 


and generally in Jewish writers ; cf. 
186 24? 321 6111 7287 9110 9510 Seven 
high mountains. These appear to 
have nothing to do with those of 18° 
242 321, though originally they are 
derived from the same source. Pass. 
+ ‘and go’ q, B. 5. Seven (8). 
&gt;a. One of them coming from 
the twest}. This must be the Nile, 
as Dillmann takes it, but the description 
‘ from the west’ cannot be right. Hence 
I take ‘drab (= west) to be a trans- 
literation of may, which here means 
simply ‘ desert’ or ‘steppe’, and render 
‘coming from the desert’. Here Ara- 
maic fails to explain the difficulty. 
The Great Sea, i.e. the Mediter- 
ranean ; cf. Num. 346 7, 6. The 
Euphrates and Tigris. The Ery- 
thraean Sea. &lt;A general name for 
the Arabian, Persian, and Indian seas. 
7. The remaining four, i.e. the 
Indus, Ganges, Oxus, and Jaxartes 
(Dillmann). {Two of them to.) These 
words must be supplied. [And some 
say: into the desert.) This is mani- 


festly a gloss. Such a second view is 
impossible in a vision. 8. Two in 
the mainland and five in the Great 
Sea (bedfilory,a,b). So also aehkn 
save that they omit ‘in the mainland’ ὦ 
after ‘two’. a-m read ‘seven, and — 
two in the Red Sea’: m ‘two in the — 
mainland and five in the Red Sea’. Ὁ 
The text is wholly uncertain, Perhaps 
we might compare Jub, 839 where ‘five — 
great islands’ are referred to. The 
sevenfold division of the earth is of — 
Babylonian origin. See K. A. 7.5 618. — 
From this source is developed the idea | 
in 4 Ezra 642 where the land is said to — 
be $ths of the earth and the sea 4th, 
the seven high mountains in our text, 
774, the seven streams, 775, and the 
seven islands, 778, : 

LXXVIII, LXXIX. The rela- 
tions of the sun and moon are again 
described, as well as the waxing and 
the waning of the moon. LXXVIII.1. 
And?° (a-q, ehl). &gt; ᾳ, B-ehl. Halévy 
points out that the two names of the 
sun given here correspond to the two. 











Sect. I] Chapters LXXVII. 4—LXXVIII. 6 167 


has four names: the first name is Asénji, the second Ebla, the 
third Bends¢, and the fourth Erie. 3. These are the two 
great luminaries: their circumference is like the circumference 
of the heaven, and the size of the circumference of both is alike. 
4. In the circumference of the sun there are seven portions of 
light which are added to it more than to the moon, and in 
definite measures it is transferred till the seventh portion of the 


sun is exhausted. 5. And they set and enter the portals of 


_ the west, and make their revolution by the north, and come 


forth through the eastern portals on the face of the heaven. 
6. And when the moon rises one-fourteenth part appears in the 


‘new moon’, 


seasons of the year in Palestine; cf. 2° 
8 468%. Orjarés from DIN “iN is the 
sun when his power is diminished in 


the winter season; for DIN or WN 


= ‘potsherd’ as well as ‘sun’. The 


-second name ΠῸΠ in our text, altered 


into Tomas by change of @ and 7; 
denotes the sun when the heat is 
powerful in the summer, from OM. 
2. Halévy attempts to show that the 
four names of the moon are connected 
with its various phases. But this 
seems improbable. Asdnji from }i¥*N 
ΤΣ where {WN is a diminutive of 
υὴς and ΕἾΝ merely an intensive ter- 
mination, This is the name of the 


-|moon in connexion with its likeness 


to the human face; cf. ver. 17. Ebla, 
corrupted from nyad = the pale star, 


denotes, he thinks, the moon in her 


waning period. Benisé, from ND37}3 
(i.e. MD3, to cover), is an appropriate 
name of the moon in the period of 
conjunction when she is invisible. But 
in Prov. 7% Ps. 814 DD means the 
fall moon as opposed to WINN, ‘the 
Erae from 1} (i. 6. from 
i, ‘ to cast, dart,’ or possibly ,as Martin 
proposes, from MN, ‘ to journey,’ ‘ go’) 
is suitable as a designation of the wax- 
ing or full moon, 5. . Of. 72% 57 
732. According to Chullin 60° the sun 


‘and moon were originally of the same 


size, but that God subsequently bade 
the moon to lessen her size (NN "OY 
‘JOXY). The size of the circum- 
ference (a). β ‘the size’. + ‘like the 
circumference of the heaven’ a-uw— 
a repetition from the preceding clause. 
4, From 7251 and 73° we have already 
learnt that the light of the sun is 
sevenfold that of the moon: from 73? 
that light is added to the moon in due 
measure. Here we are further in- 
formed that 3th of the light of the sun 
is gradually transferred to the moon, 
and that this seventh part is wholly 
transferred when the moon is full. 
Of’ the above Semitic words the two 
names for the sun DI and MDH are 
Hebrew and not Aramaic, while of the 


four names of the moon }iW*x, nya, 
and MDI"}j2 are Hebrew ‘only. ‘In 
Aramaic ND is ‘moon’, and Mm) 
‘month’ or ‘new moon’. When our 
translator wishes to render ‘new moon’ 
he puts Saréq (= WIN) as in 78%. 
5. By the north: cf. 725. 6-17. 
These verses give a detailed descrip- 
tion of the waxing and waning of the 
moon, of the length of the months, &amp;c. 
6. This case where there are fourteen 
days from new moon to full moon 
has already been treated of in 735 6 
(notes). In this verse the text follows 


a-u. wu is partly untranslatable. β 


168 The Book of Enoch (Sect. IIT 


heaven : [the light becomes full in her]: on the fourteenth day 
she accomplishes her light. 7. And fifteen parts of light are 
transferred to her till the fifteenth day (when) her light is 
accomplished, according to the sign of the year, and she becomes 
fifteen parts, and the moon grows by (the addition of) fourteenth 
parts. 8. And in her waning (the moon) decreases on the 
first day to fourteen parts of her light, on the second to thirteen 
parts of light, on the third to twelve, on the fourth to. eleven, — 
on the fifth to ten, on the sixth to nine, on the seventh to eight, — 
on the eighth to seven, on the ninth to six, on the tenth to five, — 
on the eleventh to four, on the twelfth to three, on the thir- | 
teenth to two, on the fourteenth to the half of a seventh, and all — 


her remaining light disappears wholly on the fifteenth. 


9. And 


in certain months the month has twenty-nine days and once &gt; 


twenty-eight. 


light is transferred to the moon, and on which side it is trans-— 
11. During all the period during 


ferred to her by the sun. 


10. And Uriel showed me another law: when 


| 


which the moon is growing in her light, she is transferring it to 
herself when opposite to the sun during fourteen days [her light ἱ 
: 


reads ‘And when the moon rises, she 
appears in the heaven, and has a four- 
teenth part of the light, and on the 
fourteenth day she accomplishes all her 
light’. [The light becomes full in 
her} (a-w). I have bracketed this 
clause as a duplicate rendering of τὸ 
φῶς πληροῖ (or τελεῖ), which the trans- 
lator renders again as ‘ she accomplishes 
her light’. 7. This case, where 
there are fifteen days from new moon 
to full moon, has already been discussed : 
see 73% 8 (note). 8. As the moon 
wanes her light decreases each day by 
j;th part; on the fifteenth day the 
remainder, i.e. 3;th, vanishes. Half 
of a seventh (7,8). a-z¢ ‘half and to 
a seventh’. 9. Twenty-nine 
days: cf, 7410-17 7815-17, Once 
twenty-eight. As we learnt from 
7418-16 that the author was acquainted 
with the eight-year cycle of the Greeks, 

















so here, as Wieseler has already pointed 
out, we find a reference to the seventy- 
six year cycle of Callippus. The cycle 
of Callippus is already an emended 
Metonic cycle. According to the cycle 
of Meton, to which there is no allusion — 
in Enoch, seven lunar months were 
intercalated in nineteen lunar years, 
in the third, fifth, eighth, eleventh, - 
thirteenth, sixteenth, nineteenth, and 
thus the difference between the solar 
and lunar years at the end of this cycle 
was about 72 hours. Callippus, recog- 
nizing this difference, quadrupled the 
Metonic cycle and deducted one day 
from the last month of this period of 
seventy-six years, and thus this month 
had only twenty-eight days as in our 
text. 11, The moon waxes ov: 
against the sun on the side turned to the 
sun, i.e. the western side. [Her ligh' 
is accomplished in the heaven] 


‘Sect. ΠῚ Chapters LXXVIII. 7—LXXIX.2 169 


is accomplished in the heaven], and when she is illumined 
throughout, her light is accomplished in the heaven. 12. 
And on the first day she is called the new moon, for on that 
day the light rises upon her. 13. She becomes full moon 
| exactly on the day when the sun sets in the west, and from the 
| east she rises at night, and the moon shines the whole night 
_ through till the sun rises over against her and the moon is seen 
over against the sun. 14. On the side whence the light of 
the moon comes forth, there again she wanes till all the light 
vanishes and all the days of the month are at an end, and her 
circumference is empty, void of light. 1ὅ. And three months 
_ she makes of thirty days, and at her time she makes three 
months of twenty-nine days each, in which she accomplishes her 
waning in the first period of time, and in the first portal for one 
hundred and seventy-seven days. 16. And in the time of her 
going out she appears for three months (of) thirty days each, and 
for three months she appears (of) twenty-nine each. 17. At 
- night she appears like a man for twenty days each time, and by 
| day she appears like the heaven, and there is nothing else in her 
save her light. 


Recapitulation of several of the Laws. 


- LXXIX. 1. And now, my son,1 have shown thee everything, 
and the law of all the stars of the heaven is completed. 2, And 
he showed me all the laws of these for every day, and for every 
‘season of bearing rule, and for every year, and for its going 


(8). Bracketed as a dittograph from 
the next clause. a reads ‘her light is 


accomplished ’, 13. This remark 
is quite true. She becomes. 4,8 
prefix ‘and’, 15. Each half-year 


has three months of thirty days and 
three of twenty-nine. And (a). &gt; 8. 
At her time. + gmt (and indeed gu 
originally) ‘when she is accomplishing 
her waning’. In the first period of 
time, i.e. in the first half-year. The 


author recognizes only two seasons in 
the year; cf. 3 4 781 (note). So often 
as the moon is in the first portal during 
the first half-year, she is waning; cf. 
79% 4, 16. In the time of her 
going out, i.e. in the second half of 
the year. 17. Cf. ver. 2 (note). 
LXXIxX. 1. My son. + ‘ Methu- 
selah’ 4,8. The law of all (a-u). 
u,B ‘all the laws of’. 2. Of 
bearing rule (a-w). β ‘for every 


170 The Book of Enoch (Sect. IIT. 


forth, and for the order prescribed to it every month and every 
week : 3. And the waning of the moon which takes place in 
the sixth portal: for in this sixth portal her light is accom- 
plished, and after that there is the beginning of the waning: 
4. (And the waning) which takes place in the first portal in its 
season, till one hundred and seventy-seven days are accomplished ; 
reckoned according to weeks, twenty-five (weeks) and two days. 
5. She falls behind the sun and the order of the stars exactly 
five days in the course of one period, and when this place which 
thou seest has been traversed. 6. Such is the picture and 
sketch of every luminary which Uriel the archangel, who is 
their leader, showed unto me. 

_ LXXX. 1. And in those days the angel Uriel answered and 
said to me: ‘ Behold, I have shown thee everything, Enoch, 
and I have revealed everything to thee that thou shouldest see 
this sun and this moon, and the leaders of the stars of the 
heaven and all those who turn them, their tasks and times and 


departures. 


power’. 8, 4. Cf. 7815, but the 
verse is obscure or corrupt. 3. Of 
the waning (a). β ‘of the month 
and of the waning’. 4, (And the 
waning.) Restored. Soalso Flemming 
and Martin. 5. She falls behind 
(a-t). m ‘and she falls behind’ ; ¢, B-n 
‘and how she falls behind’. And the 
order. Here I have emended wa (&gt;mq) 
baSer‘ata of a, B—bx (= ‘and according 
to the order of’) into walaer‘ita. For 
this use of la in replacing another 
preposition in an enumeration—in this 
instance ’&amp;m—see Dillmann’s Gramm.? 
p- 347. Our text here identifies the solar 
and sidereal years,asin74". Exactly 
five days. Cf. 7419-17, The moon falls 
behind five days in the half-year. 
LXXxX. For the reasons for regard- 
ing this chapter as an interpolation 
see Introduction to this Book of the 


‘action of men; ef. 4 Ezra 51-18, 


; 
Heavenly Luminaries (pp. 147-8). π᾿ ᾿ 
that Introduction we have already re- 
marked that the moment we have done — 
with 79 we pass into a world of new 
conceptions, the whole interest of 
which is ethical and nothing else. 
There is absolutely no fixity in natural 
phenomena: their laws and uniformi- 
ties are always dependent on the moral _ 
line of ree is quite alien ΜῈ 
72-79. See 2! (note). 1. 4 
angel (gmt). &gt; qu, B. I ἐς 
shown (mq, β). gtu ‘I will show’. 
Leaders of the stars: cf. 72° 75% % 
Those who turn them. These are 
probably the winds ; οἵ, 72573%. And 
times. + ‘and they turn them’ gmé. 
Verses 2-8 are written as tristi 
This fact helps us materially in 
criticism of verses 5 and 7. 

















Sect. IIT] 


Chapters LXXIX, 8—LXXX. 5 


171 


Perversion of Nature and the heavenly Bodies owing to the Sin 
of Men. 
2. And in the days of the sinners the years shall be shortened, 
And their seed shall be tardy on their lands and fields, 
And all things on the earth shall alter, 


And shall not appear in their time: 
And the rain shall be kept back 
And the heaven shall withhold (it). 


3. And in those times the fruits of the earth shall be backward, 
And shall not grow in their time 
And the fruits of the trees shall be withheld in their time. 


4. And the moon shall alter her order, 


And not appear at her time. 


5, [ And in those days the sun shall be seen and he shall journey 
in the evening fon the extremity of the great chariot 


int the west] 


And shall shine more brightly than accords with the order 


of light. 


Cf. Jer. 3° 5%, Shall alter (8). 
‘Alter’ is here intransitive, but a-u 

give the transitive tense and ¢ supplies 

‘its ways’. Shall withhold (m, 8). 
- ggtu ‘shall stand still’ (by merely the 
change of a vowel point). 4. Of. 
for similar ideas Joel 21° Amos 8° 
4 Ezra 54, - 5. The first two lines 
of this verse are very corrupt and have 
been dislocated from their proper con- 
text in this chapter. By their removal 
verses 4-5 form a tristich relating to 
the moon. These corrupt clauses are 
probably fragments of a tristich relat- 
ing to the sun. The Ethiopic reads: 
‘ And in those days the heaven (mq, B: 
gtu ‘in the heaven’) shall be seen, 
and hunger shall come on the extremity 
of the great chariot to (a—g : q, ¢? β ‘in’) 
the West’. Here Halévy conjectured, 
and his conjecture is generally ac- 
cepted, that DWN (= ‘ the heaven’) 
was corrupt for YOY (= ‘ the sun’), 


IY" (= ‘ hunger’) for IVY (= ‘ even- 
ing’). But we must go further. 
There is no meaning in the phrase ‘ on 
the extremity’ in connexion with the 
chariot of the sun. This phrase = 
ΥΡΞ which may be corrupt for ΝΘ 
= ‘causing distress’. Next there is 
no point in saying ‘the sun shall be 
seen’, This line, moreover, is too 
short, and the second too long. If we 
transfer ‘in the evening’ to the first 
line we have ‘shall be seen in the 
evening’. The possible corruption 
here is suggested by 4 Ezra 54 ‘ relu- 
cescet subito sol noctu’. MN (‘shall 
be seen’) may be corrupt for M7 = 
‘shall rise’. Thus we arrive at the 
following :— 
‘ And in those days the sun shall rise 
in the evening, 
And his great chariot journey to the 
west, causing distress (as it goes).’ 
With this we might contrast Amos 8° 


172 


The Book of Enoch 


[Sect. IIT 


6. And many chiefs of the stars shall transgress the order 


(prescribed). 


And these shall alter their orbits and tasks, 
And not appear at the seasons prescribed to them. 


7. And the whole order of the stars shall be concealed from the 


sinners, 


And the thoughts of those on the earth shall err concerning 


them, 


[| And they shall be altered from all their ways], 
Yea, they shall err and take them to be gods. 


8. And evil shall be multiplied upon’ them, 
And punishment shall come upon them 


So as to destroy all.’ 


The Heavenly Tablets and the Mission of Enoch. 


LXXXI. 1. And he said unto me: 
‘Observe, Enoch, these heavenly tablets, 
And read what is written thereon, 

And mark every individual fact.’ 


2. And I observed the heavenly tablets, and read everything 
which was written (thereon) and understood everything, and 
read the book of all the deeds of mankind, and of all the 


‘I will cause the sun to go down at 
noon’. The above emendations are 
possible in Hebrew, but not in Aramaic, 
6. Chiefs of the stars shall trans- 
gress the order (prescribed) (q°", 
and in part by gq, 0,0). Beer con- 
jectured this text, which differs from 
that of the rest of the MSS. by the 
vocalization of two consonants. The 
rest of the MSS. = ‘chiefs of the 
stars of the order shall transgress’. 
7. Shall be concealed from the 
sinners: cf. 75? 824-6 Those on 
the earth. This phrase is used here 
exactly in the sense in which it appears 
in the interpolations in the Parables ; 


see 375 (note). [And they shall 7 
altered ... ways.] Bracketed as 
intrusion : possibly it is a dittograph 
of ver. 6%. Take them to be 

cf. 191 Acts 742, 8. All (a). ὃ 
‘ them all’, : ἐπ 









LXXXI. For the reasons for re- 
garding this chapter as an interpolation — 
see Introduction to this Book of 
Heavenly Luminaries (p. 148). 
These heavenly tablets. Fora 
plete account of this and kindred 
pressions see 47% (note). B-n 
‘the writing of the heavenly tablets 
2. The book of all the deeds (mt 
gu ‘the book, all the deeds’: q, B ‘ 


acne 


Chapters LXXX. 6—LXXXI. 6 175 


children of flesh that shall be upon the earth to the remotest 
generations, 8, And forthwith I blessed the great Lord, the 
King of glory for ever, in that He has made all the works of 
the world, 


| 
“Sect. TIT] 


And I extolled the Lord because of His patience, 
And blessed Him because of the children of men. 


_ 4, And after that I said: 
: ‘ Blessed is the man who dies in righteousness and goodness, 
Concerning whom there is no book of unrighteousness 
written, 
‘ And against whom no day of judgement shall be found,’ 





5. And those seven holy ones brought me and placed me on 
the earth before the door of my house, and said to me; ‘ Declare 
everything to thy son Methuselah, and show to all thy children 
‘that no flesh is righteous in the sight of the Lord, for He is 
their Creator. 6. One year we will leave thee with thy son, 
till thou givest thy (last) commands, that thou mayest teach thy 

children and record (it) for them, and testify to all thy children ; 
and in the second year they shall take thee from their midst. 


hook and all that was written therein, ones’, Cf. 87? 9021, 23 and 20. Mo 
all the deeds’, 8. Of. 2214 for a flesh is righteous, &amp;c.: cf. Job 92 
‘Similar expression of praise, The Ps, 141, Creator: cf. 9419, 6. 
great Lord (a), B‘theLord’, The Thy. son (a), 8 ‘thy sons’, These 


King of glory for ever (a). β-ὖς 
‘the eternal King of glory’, Children 
of men (a, filoy ,a,b). B-fhilnoy χὰ ,b 
‘children of the world’, 4. See 
Introd. (p. 148) on the contrast be- 
tween this blessing and that pro- 
nounced by the writer of 72-79. 
Book of unrighteousness; see 47° 
(note). Day of judgement (gv). 
4, @ B ‘unrighteousness’, Shall be 
found (a-m), m, i?B ‘has been 
found’, If this clause be taken strictly, 
it is here taught that there is no 
judgement for the righteous, 5. 
Seven holy ones (a). β ‘three holy 


two verses, vv. 5, 6, may be inserted 
to serve as an introduction to 91-104. 
Till, After ‘till? (=I) the MSS. 
add ‘again’ = ἽΝ which is here simply 
a dittograph of the preceding. The 
word ‘again’ is meaningless as it 
stands, Givest thy (last) com- 
mands (téézéz mt, B-cde). This is 
the idiomatic meaning of the Hebrew 
my, The reading of g is a corruption 
of mt, Hence all MSS, but q and 
three third-rate MSS. support the above 
text. ᾳ = ‘comfortest him’ (t&amp;nzé&amp;zd), 
According to Dillmann cde read té‘éz%z 
= ‘growest strong’. But this gives no 


174 The Book of Enoch 


7. Let thy heart be strong, 
For the good shall announce righteousness to the ae 


[Sect. IIT 


The righteous with the righteous shall rejoice, 
And*shall offer congratulation to one another. 


8. But the sinners shall die with the sinners, 
And the apostate go down with the apostate. 


9. And those who practise righteousness shall die on account of 
the deeds of men, 
And be taken away on account of the doings of the godless.’ 
10. And in those days they ceased to speak to me, and I came 
to my people, blessing the Lord of the world. — 


Charge given to Enoch: the four Intercalary Days : the Stars whieh 
lead the Seasons and the Months. 


LXXXII. 1. And now, my son Methuselah, all these thing 
Iam recounting to thee and writing’ down for thee, and I have 
revealed to thee everything, and given thee books concerning all 
these: so preserve, my son Methuselah, the books from thy. 
father’s hand, and (see) that thou deliver them to the generations | 


of the world. 


suitable sense. 8. The apostate 
go down, i.e.intoGehenna. 9. The 
righteous die indeed, yet are they 
‘gathered’ unto the abodes of the 
blessed. The phrase is borrowed 
directly from Is. 571, where the literal 
translation runs, ‘the righteous is 
hegre out of the way of or because of 
2 Kings 9990 Book’ ‘of Wisdom “gt, 
The Hebrew verb is used of being 
‘ gathered to one’s fathers’, Num. 20. 
In Ps. 10429 God is said to ‘gather’ 
the spirit of animals when they die. 
10. Lord of the world (or ‘ Eternal 
Lord’ a-q: q, 8 ‘Lord of the ages’); 
ef, 18.123 584 818 827 842. 


ες Enoch filio suo Matusalae nihil aliu 
















4 
&amp; 
x 

LXXXII. The conclusion of the 
Book of the Heavenly Luminaries, 
1. In 334 Uriel writes down everything 
for Enoch ; but in this book, ef. 721 742 
75° 7950 821, Uriel only shows the 
hidden things to Enoch, and Enoch 
writes them down. For thee. &gt; gmt. : 

Methuselah. &gt; gmq. Deliver them 
to the generations (‘ children’ g) of q 
the world. These revelations 
Enoch are for all the world from 
earliest generations; those in 1-36 are 
only for the far distant generations ; 
cf. 12. See special Introd. (p. 149). 
is evidently this passage that Tertu 
refers to in De Cultu Fem. i. 3 ‘Ou 


iat Ohapters EXXXL 7-ELXXXI.6 175 


2. I have given wisdom to thee and to thy children, 
[And thy children that shall be to thee], 
That they may give it to their children for generations, 
This wisdom (namely) that passeth their thought. 


8. And those who understand it shall not sleep, 
But shall listen with the ear that they may learn this 
wisdom, 
And it shall please those that eat thereof better than good 
food. 


4, Blessed are all the righteous, blessed are all those who walk 
in the way of righteousness and sin not as the sinners, in the 
reckoning of all their days in which the sun traverses the heaven, 
entering into and departing from the portals for thirty days with 
the heads of thousands of the order of the stars, together with 
the four which are intercalated which divide the four portions of 
‘the year, which lead them and enter with them four days. 
5. Owing to them men shall be at fault and not reckon them in the 
whole reckoning of the year : yea, men shall be at fault, and not 
recognize them accurately. 6. For they belong to the reckon- 
ing of the year and are truly recorded (thereon) for ever, one in 
the first portal and one in the third, and one in the fourth and 
one in the sixth, and the year is tie ane in three hundred and 
sixty-four days. 


iaadaverit quam ut notitiam eorum 
posteris suis traderit’, 2. Wis- 
dom. The surpassing wisdom con- 
veyed in these revelations is a frequent 
theme with the Enoch writers; cf. 374 


intercalary days introduced by four 
leaders: cf. ver. 11,757. Blessed 
are all those (¢, B-y). &gt; gu, y. mq 
‘blessed (+‘ moreover’ 4) are all’ 
(+‘the righteous’ m), Heads of 


921 931-14. To thee and to thy thousands, i.e. the chiliarchs which 
children (mqu,B): cf. ῬΒ. 788,5, treads lead thesedays. Divide (qt, B-no ,b). 
*to thy son’; g corrupt, Aswemust Cf. 82%. gmu, no,b ‘are divided’. 
infer from these words that Lamechis 5. Cf.75%. Whole reckoning of the 


already born, the writer has followed 
the Samaritan or Massoretic reckon- 


year. Sowith Beer I correct bahasiba 
kuéll ‘alam (= ‘in the reckoning of the 


ing; the former would allow of Noah 
being present, [And thy children 
,-,tothee.] Bracketed as an inter- 
polation, 8. Better than good 
food: cf. Ps. 191° 4, The four 


4 


whole world’) into bakuélli has&amp;ba 
“Amat. 6. On the four intercalary 
days, and the portals to which they 
belong, see 75. The year is com- 
pleted in three hundred, &amp;c. (8). 


176 The Book of Enoch [Sect. IIT 


7, And the account thereof is accurate and the recorded 
reckoning thereof exact; for the luminaries, and months and 
festivals, and years and days; has Uriel shown and revealed to 
me, to whom the Lord of the whole creation of the world hath 
subjected the host of heaven. 8. And he has power over 
night and day in the heaven to cause the light to give light to 
men—sun, moon, and stars, and all the powers of the heaven 
which revolve in their circular chariots. 9. And. these are 
the orders of the stars, which set in their places, and in their - 
seasons and festivals and months. 

10. And these are the names of those who lead them, 
who watch that they enter at their times, in their orders, 
in their seasons, in their months, in their periods of dominion, 
and in their positions. 11. Their four leaders who divide 
the four parts of the year enter first; and after them the 
twelve leaders of the orders who divide the months; and 
for the three hundred and sixty (days) there are heads over 
thousands who divide the days; and for the four inter- 
calary days there are the leaders which sunder the four parts” 
of the year. 12. And these heads‘over thousands are inter- | 
calated between leader and leader, each behind a station, but 


This would be impossible without 82-2, 
10. Who watch that they enter. 
Here the Ethiopic is literally ‘who 
watch and enter’, But the context 
requires the rendering I have given. i: 
Hence it is possible that we have here 
the survival of the Hebrew idiom of the 
voluntative with waw. If so, the tex 
would represent something like 


a-gmu ‘the year of three hundred and 
sixty-four days is completed’. ν δ 
To whom... hath subjected. The 
text a-g, B reads za’azaza (za’azazd 
beefnx) lita (= ‘whom He hath com- 
manded for me’) which I have emended 
into za’azaza loth =@ ἐπέταξε. But ἐπέ- 
rage is corrupt for ὑπέταξε. Hence my 
translation. Uriel is the ruler of the 






starry world, 721. Lord of the whole 
creation of the world. Here only; 
οἵ, 84%, 9-20. Dillmann regards 
these verses as a later addition to the 
book, but without adequate reason, 
They are quite in harmony with all 
that rightly belongs to this section of 
the book. Moreover, 72! promises an 
account of the stars, and 791 declares 
thatthe full account has now been given, 












ΝΘ FN, Times. + ‘who lead then 
in their places’ ( ‘in their places’ ἢ ὃ 
11. For (&gt;q) the three hundred 
and sixty (days) there are heads (gqu). 
t, β ‘for the three hundred and sixty-— 
four (days) with the heads’. m supports — 
σαι, but by a slip omits ‘and sixty’. 
12. Astation, g,aread ‘his station’. 
There is no difficulty in the text of — 
gmqu which we have followed here. 


Sect. IIT] Chapter LX XXII. 7-17 177 


their leaders make the division. 13. And these are the names 
of the leaders who divide the four parts of the year which are 
ordained : Milki’él, Hel’emmélék, and Mél’éjal, and Narél. 
14. And the names of those who lead them: Adnéar’él, and 
Tjastisa’él, and *Hlomé’él—these three follow the leaders of the 
orders, and there is one that follows the three leaders of the 
orders which follow those leaders of stations that divide the four . 
parts of the year. 
15. Inthe beginning of the year Melkejal rises first and rules, 
who is named }Tam’Aini, and sunf and all the days of his 
dominion whilst he bears rule are ninety-one days. 16. And 
these are the signs of the days which are to be seen on earth in 
the days of his dominion: sweat, and heat, and calms ; and all 
the trees bear fruit, and leaves are produced on all the trees, and 
the harvest of wheat, and the rose-flowers, and all the flowers 
which come forth in the field, but the trees of the winter season 
become withered. 17. And these are the names of the leaders 
which are under them: Berka’él, Zélebs’él, and another who is 
added a head of a thousand, called Hildjaséph: and the days 
of the dominion of this (leader) are at an end. 


The twelve leaders of the months 
divide the months: the chiliarchs 


Goldschmidt and Beer have pointed 
out, these two names are one, i.e, 
27) wow = ‘the southern sun’, This 
explanation is not possible through 
Aramaic. 16. Calms (zahn w). 
a—u, hazan, ‘anxiety.’ Rose-flowers. 
Not known in the O.T. though the 
word is found in the A.V. in Is. 35! 
Song of Solomon 2. The rose is 
mentioned in Sir. 2414 3915 Wisdom 
28. But in the first two passages 


divide the 360 days, and the four 


leaders which divide the year into four 
parts have charge of the intercalary 
days. 12, I don’t understand this verse. 
13. Milkiel from ΞΟ is simply an 
inversion of Helemmelek from ρος 
as Halévy has shown. Melejal = 
ΘΝ (Schwab) and Narel = 5x73, 
‘These four are over the four seasons of 







the year. Under each of these are 
three leaders who preside over the 
three months of each season. 14. 
This verse seems unintelligible. 15- 
17. The period from spring to sum- 
nier = 91 days under the dominion of 
Melkejal. 15, Of the year (m, B). 
&gt;a-m. The leader of this period is 
named ‘Tam’dini’ and ‘sun’. As 
1370 







it is probably the oleander that is re- 
ferred to. The rose in later Hebrew is 
71) and in Aramaic NT), Which 
come forth (a-m). β ‘bloom’. &gt; m. 
17. The leaders under them, i.e. 
the leaders of the three months. 
Berka’él = 59273: Zélebs’el = Sxwady 
= ‘this is the heart of God’ (Schwab). 
Another who is added ... ealled 


178 The Book of Enoch [Sect. III 


18. The next leader after him is Hél’emmélék, whom one β 
names the shining sun, and all the days of his light are ninety-— 
one days. 19. And these are the signs of (his) days on the 
earth: glowing heat and dryness, and the trees ripen their fruits 
and prodiice all their fruits ripe and ready, and the sheep pair 
and become pregnant, and all the fruits of the earth are gathered 
in, and everything that is in the fields, and the winepress: these 
things take place in the days of his dominion. 20, These are 
the names, and the orders, and the leaders of those heads of 
thousands: Gida’ijal, Ké’él, and Hé’él, and the name of the 
head of a thousand which is added to them, Asfa’él: and the 
days of his dominion are at an end, 


months. The fourth — Asfa’él from 


HilQjaséph. There is here a play on 
ΝΘ ‘God adds’, which is merely 


the proper name Rovox e+ FD, 
18-20. The period from summer to 
autumn, 19, And these are the 
signs of (his) days (8). gmt ‘and 
these are the days of his sign’. qu 
corrupt forms of gint. 20. This 
verse is confused. The three names 


an inversion of Hildjaséph from noon 
—is the chiliarch who has to do with the 
intercalary day under one of the four 
chief leaders. There is no account 
the remaining six months, This may 






have been omitted by the final re- 
dactor. ‘ 





are those of the leaders of the three 











SECTION IV 
(CHAPTERS LXXXIII1—XC) 
THE DREAM-VISIONS, INTRODUCTION 


\A. Critical Structure. B. Relation of this Section to (a) 1-36; 
(Ὁ) 91-104. C. The Date. 1). The Problem and its Solution, 

