1. Book on the Motion of the Luminaries of the Heaven, how each one of them
stands in relation to their number, to their powers and their times, to their
names and their origins and their months, as the holy angel Uriel, who is their
leader, showed to me when he was with me. And he showed to me their whole
description as they are, and for the years of the World to eternity, until the creation
will be made anew to last forever.
2. This is the first law of the luminaries: the light (called) Sun has its exit
among the gates of heaven in the east and it sets among the gates of heaven in
the west.
3. And I saw six gates from which the sun rises and six gates where the sun
sets; and (also) the moon rises and sets in these gates, as well as the leaders of the
stars together with those which they lead. Six (gates) are in the east and six in
the west and all of them are arranged in sequence. And there are many windows
to the right and to the left of these gates.
4. And first comes out the great light called Sun and its roundness is as the
roundness of heaven and it is all filled with fire that illuminates and heats.
5. And the chariot in which it rises the winds drive. And the sun goes down
from the heaven and it turns toward north in order to travel toward the east;
and it is guided in such a way that it enters in the (proper) gate and shines (again)
in heaven.
6. In this way (the sun) emerges in the first month from the great gate, the
fourth of these six gates in the east.
7. And in this fourth gate from which the sun emerges in the first month there
are twelve window-openings from which flames come forth when (these windows)
are opened in their (proper) times.
a. e. When the sun rises in the sky it rises from this fourth gate (during) 30
days; and the sun sets exactly in this (fourth) gate in the west. 9 And in these days
the day increases over the (preceding) day and the night decreases from the
(preceding) night during 30 days. 10 'And on this (30th) day the day is two ninths,
(i.e. two) "parts", longer than the night, the day being exactly 10 parts and the
night exactly 8 parts. "And the sun rises from the fourth gate and sets in the
fourth (gate).
b. (Then) the sun moves to the fifth gate in the east, for 30 days, and it rises
from it and it sets in the fifth gate. ' 2 And then the day increases two parts and
the day amounts to eleven parts and the night decreases and amounts to seven parts.
c. 13 •And (the sun) returns to the east and enters the sixth gate and it rises
and sets in the sixth gate (during) 31 days according to its (the gate's) characteristics
(for the season). 14 And during these days the day increases over the night (until)
the day is twice (as long as) the night, such that the day amounts to twelve parts

40:10

7

and the night decreases and amounts to s ix parts. 'Then the sun sets out to
shorten the day and to lengthen the night.
d. And when the sun returns to the east it enters the sixth gate and it rises

from it and it sets (in it during) 30 days. 16• And when the 30 days are completed
the day has decreased exactly one part and the day is eleven parts and the night
is seven parts. 17 And then the sun leaves this sixth gate in the west and
e. travels toward east to rise in the fifth gate (during) 30 days and it sets also
in the west in the fifth gate. ' And on this day the day has decreased two parts

and the day is ten parts and the night is eight parts. 19. And the sun rises from the
fifth gate and it sets in the fifth gate in the west.
f. (And then) it rises in the fourth (during) 31 days (according to) its (the
gate's) characteristics (for the season), and it sets in the west. 20 , On this day the
day equals the night and they are the same and the night is nine parts and the
day is nine parts. 21 .And the sun rises from this (fourth) gate and it sets in the west.
g. And (then) it returns to the east and it rises from the third gate (during)
30 days and it sets in the west in the third gate. 'And on these days the night
increases over the day and the night increases over the (preceding) night and the
day decreases from the (preceding) day until 30 days and the night is exactly
23. And the sun rises from this third gate and it
ten parts and the day eight parts.
sets in the west in the third gate.
h. And (then) it returns toward the east and the sun rises (during) 30 days in
the second gate in the east and it sets also in the second gate in the western sky.
24• And on this day the night is eleven parts and the day seven parts. 25 •And in
these days the sun rises from this second gate and sets in the west (also) in the
second gate.
i. And (then) it returns to the east to the first gate (during) 31 days and it
26
(also) sets in the first gate in the western sky. •And on this day the night has
increased to become twice (the length of) the day and the night is exactly 12 parts
and the day is 6 parts.
k. 27• [And the sun has (thus) completed its appearances (in all gates) and
then returns to these (same) appearances and it rises (again) in all its gates (during)
30 days and it sets opposite to them in the west.]
1. 28. And (during) these days the night has decreased by a ninth part (of its
mean length), that is by one part; and the night consists of eleven parts and the
day of seven parts.
m. 29• And the sun returns and enters the second gate in the east [and it returns
to these appearances] during 30 days, rising and setting (in the second gate).
30• And in these days the night decreases in its length and the night is ten parts
and the day eight parts. 31 'And in these days the sun rises from the second gate
and sets in the west.

co

TABLE 1*

Q rises and sets in G, for 30"; d increases, n decreases. Finally d = n } 2, thus d = 10, n = 8. Sunrise and sunset in G4.
I' Q returns to E, in G ; for 30'; d increases by 2 to d = 1 1, n decreases to n = 7.

` (Q) returns to E, enters G 6 ; rises and sets in G s for 31", as appropriate: ci increases to d = 2n, thus d = 12, n = 6.
0 begins to shorten d and lengthen n:
d

Q returns to E, enters G 6 ; rises and sets in it for 30". After completion of these 30", d has decreased by 1, thus d = 11, n = 7.
Q leaves GR in the W and

c

travels to E, to rise and to set in G 5 for 30". Finally d has decreased by 2, thus d = 10, n = 8. Sunrise and sunset in G,.

f0

rises in G4 for 31°, as appropriate, sets in W. (Finally) d = n, thus n = 9, d = 9. Sunrise and sunset in G4.

Q returns to E,

rises and sets in G 3 for 30". Now n increases over d; n increases, d decreases, until (after) 30" n = 10, d = 8.

Sunrise and sunset in the W in G3.
1 ' Q returns to E,

rises in G2 for 30", sets in the W in G 2 . Finally n = 11, d = 7. Sunrise and sunset in the W in G2.

Q returns to E,
k
'

[rises and] sets in the NV in G, for 31". Finall y n lias increased to n = 2d, thus n = 12, d = 6.

{Q completed its appearances (in all gates), now returns to these appearances, rising in all gates for 30" and sets in the W.}

[0

rises in Gi for 30"

Finally] n has decreased by 1, thus n = 11, d = 7.

1 °Q returns to E, [rising] in G 2 returns to appearances, rising and setting for 30°; n decreases, thus (finally) n = 10, d = 8. Sunrise and sunset
in the W in G2.
"Q returns to E, rising in G 3 for 31°, setting in the W; n decreases to 9, thus d = 9 and n = d. {The year is 364° long.}
*Q... sun, G.

gate (its number as subscript), E/W1' ... East ; West, d ... day, n ... night { } ... intrusion

9

40:10

n. And (then) it returns to the east and it rises in the third gate (during)

31 days and it sets in the western sky. 32• And in these days the night decreases
and it is 9 parts and the day is 9 parts and the night equals the day. [And the year
is exactly 364 days (long)].
33. And the length of the day and the night and the shorteness of day and
night vary with the circuit of the sun,
34. because its course becomes longer day after day or shorter night after
night.
35. And this is the rule for the circuit of the sun, when it returns (to the east)
and rises (again). This great luminary is called "sun" for all eternity.
36. And what rises is the great luminary and it is named according to its
appearance as the Lord has commanded.
37. And it rises and similarly it sets and it does not diminish (in brightness)
and it does not rest, but travels day and night. And its light is seven times as
bright as the (light of the full) moon but with respect to their size the two are
equal.

